# Types of Research

Research studies can be classified from various perspectives, including the **applications of the findings**, the **objectives of the study**, and the **mode of enquiry**. 

## 1. Descriptive Vs Analytical Research

### Descriptive Research :

It aims to systematically portray and accurately describe existing situations.

**Descriptive research** studies are primarily concerned with describing the characteristics of a particular individual, situation, group, problem, phenomenon, service, or program. The major purpose of descriptive research is the **description of the state of affairs as it exists at present**. These studies answer questions like "what is", where, when but not the why.

- **Measuring specific items**: Researchers seek to measure items such as frequency of shopping, preferences of people, or other similar data.

- **Methods used**: Survey methods of all kinds, including comparative and correlational methods, are utilized in descriptive research. Structured observation and structured interviews are also appropriate.

### Analytical Research :

**Analytical research** requires the researcher to use facts or information already available and analyze these to make a critical evaluation of the material.

Key characteristics of analytical research include:
- **Involves existing data**: It relies on facts or information that have already been collected.
- **Critical evaluation**: The core task is to critically evaluate this existing material.

Examples: 
* Analyzing sales data to improve marketing strategies.
* A retail company using analytical research to enhance its marketing strategies. They gather extensive data on consumer behavior, purchase history, website interactions, and demographic information.

## 2. Applied Vs Fundamental

From the perspective of its application, research is broadly categorized into pure (or fundamental/basic) research and applied research.

Difference lies in their primary goals: applied research seeks to solve immediate, practical problems, while fundamental research aims to expand the general body of knowledge and theory, often without an immediate practical application in mind.

### Applied Research :

**Applied research** aims at **finding a solution for an immediate problem** facing a society or an industrial/business organization. It involves applying research techniques, procedures, and methods to collect information about various aspects of a situation, issue, problem, or phenomenon. The information gathered is then used for practical purposes such as **policy formulation, administration, and the enhancement of understanding of a phenomenon** to bring about change. Most research in the social sciences is applied research.

It is deductive in nature that means it keeps some theories as its base while conducting research.

#### Key characteristics of applied research:

- **Solves practical, real-world problems**.

- Its findings are designed for use in **understanding a phenomenon/issue or to bring about change** in a program/situation.

- Examples include research to identify social, economic, or political trends affecting an institution.

- Applied research often utilizes **quantitative methodologies** (especially for measuring impact or extent of use), it can also incorporate **qualitative methods** when exploring the nature of a problem or phenomenon.
    - _Example_: Studying consumer response to a new product.
    - _Example_: Evaluating the impact of a workplace wellness program on productivity.

### Fundamental Research :

Fundamental research is inductive in nature that means it comes with new theory discoveries.

**Fundamental research**, also known as **basic or pure research**, is primarily concerned with generalizations and with the formulation of a theory. Its main purpose is **gathering knowledge for knowledge's sake**. 

It involves developing and testing theories and hypotheses that are intellectually challenging to the researcher and **may or may not have practical application at the present time or in the future**.

Key characteristics of fundamental research:

- **Develops new theories or knowledge** and adds to the existing organized body of scientific knowledge.

- It is concerned with the **development, examination, verification, and refinement of research methods, procedures, techniques, and tools** that form the body of research methodology. This includes developing sampling techniques, methodologies for assessing validity, or instruments to measure attitudes.

- Examples include research concerning natural phenomena, pure mathematics, or human behavior with a view to making generalizations about it.
    - _Example_: Researching theories of human motivation.
    - _Example_: Developing a new sampling technique.

## 3. Quantitative Vs Qualitative

The mode of enquiry broadly consists of two approaches: the **structured approach** (quantitative research) and the **unstructured approach** (qualitative research).

### Quantitative Research :

It is a systematic investigation that primarily focuses on quantifying data, variables, and relationships. It involves the use of statistical, mathematical, and computational techniques to collect and analyze data, aiming to quantify the variation in a phenomenon and make **generalisations to the total population**..

Quantitative research is often used to establish patterns, test hypotheses, and make predictions.

Focuses on numerical data and statistical analysis. It follows a structured, rigid, and predetermined methodology.
- A survey on student performance using test scores.
- Evaluating the impact of an intervention or program, or determining its costs.
- Market research to find out consumer opinion or copy research to check understanding of communications.

### Qualitative Research :

**Qualitative research** is concerned with **qualitative phenomena**, exploring situations, perceptions, feelings, attitudes, values, beliefs, and experiences. It is a method of inquiry that seeks to understand human experiences, behaviors, and interactions by exploring them **in-depth**, discovering underlying motives and desires. 

Explores subjective experiences and meanings. It is characterized by an **unstructured, flexible, and open approach to enquiry**.

- Interviewing patients about their hospital experience.
- Investigating the reasons for human behavior (Motivation Research).
- Describing the living conditions of a community or people's different opinions on an issue.

## 4. Conceptual Vs Empirical

Difference lies in their approach to knowledge generation: conceptual research builds theory from abstract ideas, while empirical research tests and refines theory through real-world data and observation.

Conceptual research provides the "what" and "why" through theoretical frameworks, while empirical research provides the "how much" and "how" through verifiable data from direct experience.

### Conceptual Research :

Conceptual Research involves theorizing and synthesizing ideas and concepts without direct observation or experimentation. It is related to some abstract idea or theory, and used to develop new concepts or to reinterpret existing one. 

It includes analytical and interpretative methods, including literature review, theoretical synthesis, and logical reasoning.

Based on abstract ideas and theories.
* Theoretical models in economics or philosophy.
* Developing theories of philosophy, Mathematics and Economics
* Formulating new economic or mathematical models based on existing data

### Empirical Research :

Empirical Research involves direct observation, experimentation, and the collection of measurable evidence. It is fundamentally data-based research, coming up with conclusions that are capable of being verified by observation or experiment. This approach **generates new, primary data.

**Observation or Experimentation**: Empirical research relies on experience or observation alone, often without undue regard for system and theory initially. It emphasizes getting facts firsthand, at their source, and actively doing things to stimulate the production of desired information.

**Data-based and Verifiable**: The conclusions drawn from empirical research can be verified through observation or experiment. Evidence gathered through such studies is considered a powerful support for a given hypothesis.

**Active Data Collection**: This includes the use of instruments and measurements to gather new data.
	Observing behavioral changes in response to a new educational method.
	Conducting clinical trials to test a new drug.

Experimental methods : controlled experiments, surveys, observations, and statistical analysis.

