# Sampling Design

- Sample Design    
- Sample Determination
- Sampling Errors    
- Size
    
### Census and Sample Survey

All items in any field of inquiry constitute a 'Universe' or 'Population.' A complete enumeration of all items in the 'population' is known as a census inquiry. It can be presumed that in such an inquiry, when all items are covered, no element of chance is left and the highest accuracy is obtained.

However, when the field of inquiry is large, this method becomes difficult to adopt because of the resources involved. Many a time, it is not possible to examine every item in the population. It is possible to obtain sufficiently accurate results by studying only a part of the total population, called respondents.

The selected respondents constitute what is technically called a 'sample.' The selection process is called 'sampling technique.' The survey so conducted is known as a 'sample survey.'

### Implications of a Sample Design

A sample design is a technique or the procedure that the researcher would adopt in selecting items for the sample from a given population. The sample design is determined before data are collected. The researcher must select/prepare a sample design which should be reliable and appropriate for their research study.

### Steps in Sample Design

1. **Type of universe:** This can be finite (number of items is certain, e.g., the number of workers in a factory) or infinite (number of items is infinite, e.g., the number of stars in the sky).
    
2. **Sampling unit:** This may be a geographical one (state, district, village, etc.), a construction unit (house, flat, etc.), a social unit (family, club, school, etc.), or an individual.
    
3. **Source list:** Also known as a 'sampling frame' from which the sample is to be drawn. It contains the names of all items of a universe.
    
4. **Size of sample:** Refers to the number of items to be selected from the universe to constitute a sample.
    
5. **Parameters of interest:** One must consider the specific population parameters which are of interest (e.g., the proportion of persons with some characteristic in the population).
    
6. **Budgetary constraint:** Cost considerations.
    
7. **Sampling procedure:** The researcher must decide the type of sample they will use, i.e., they must decide about the technique to be used in selecting the items for the sample.
    
### Criteria of Selecting a Sampling Procedure

While selecting a sampling procedure, the researcher must ensure that the procedure causes a relatively small sampling error and helps to control for systematic bias.

**Sampling errors** are the random variations in the sample estimates around the true population parameters.

**Systematic bias** is a consistent, repeatable error that skews data or results in a particular direction due to a flaw in the system, process, or measurement method. Unlike random error, which varies unpredictably, systematic bias affects all measurements or observations in the same way, leading to distorted conclusions. Systematic bias results from errors in the sampling procedures.

A systematic bias is the result of one or more of the following factors:

1. Inappropriate sampling frame
    
2. Defective measuring device
    
3. Non-respondents
    
4. Indeterminancy principle
    
5. Natural bias in the reporting of data
    
Sampling error decreases with the increase in the size of the sample. The measurement of sampling error is usually called the 'precision of the sampling plan.' If we increase the sample size, the precision can be improved. But increasing the size of the sample has its own limitations, viz., a large-sized sample increases the cost of collecting data and also enhances the systematic bias. Thus, the effective way to increase precision is usually to select a better sampling design which has a smaller sampling error for a given sample size at a given cost.

### Characteristics of a Good Sample Design

a) The sample design must result in a truly representative sample.

b) The sample design must be such which results in a small sampling error.

c) The sample design must be viable in the context of funds available for the research study.

d) The sample design must be such that systematic bias can be controlled in a better way.

e) The sample should be such that the results of the sample study can be applied, in general, for the universe with a reasonable level of confidence.

### Different Types of Sample Designs

- **Probability sampling** is based on the concept of random selection.
    
- **Non-probability sampling** is 'non-random' sampling.
    
#### Non-probability Sampling

Non-probability sampling is also known by different names such as deliberate sampling, purposive sampling, and judgment sampling. In this type of sampling, items for the sample are selected deliberately by the researcher; their choice concerning the items remains supreme.

#### Probability Sampling

Probability sampling is also known as 'random sampling' or 'chance sampling.' Under this, every item of the universe has an equal chance of inclusion in the sample. Random sampling ensures the law of Statistical Regularity, which states that if on an average the sample chosen is a random one, the sample will have the same composition and characteristics as the universe. This is the reason why random sampling is considered as the best technique of selecting a representative sample.

### Complex Random Sampling Designs

1. Systematic sampling
    
2. Stratified sampling
    
3. Cluster sampling
    
4. Area sampling
    
5. Multi-stage sampling
    
6. Sampling with probability proportional to size
    
7. Sequential sampling
    

#### Systematic sampling

Only the first unit is selected randomly, and the remaining units of the sample are selected at fixed intervals. For instance, if a 4 percent sample is desired, the first item would be selected randomly from the first twenty-five, and thereafter every 25th item would automatically be included in the sample.

#### Stratified sampling

This is used if a population from which a sample is to be drawn does not constitute a homogeneous group. Under stratified sampling, the population is divided into several sub-populations that are individually more homogeneous than the total population (the different sub-populations are called 'strata'). Then, we select items from each stratum to constitute a sample.

#### Cluster sampling

In cluster sampling, the total population is divided into a number of relatively small subdivisions which are themselves clusters of still smaller units, and then some of these clusters are randomly selected for inclusion in the overall sample.

#### Area sampling

If clusters happen to be some geographic subdivisions, in that case, cluster sampling is better known as area sampling.

#### Multi-stage sampling

Multi-stage sampling is a further development of the principle of cluster sampling.

#### Sampling with probability proportional to size

In case the cluster sampling units do not have the same number of elements, it is considered appropriate to use a random selection process where the probability of each cluster being included in the sample is proportional to the size of the cluster.

#### Sequential sampling

This sampling design is a somewhat complex sample design. The ultimate size of the sample under this technique is not fixed in advance but is determined according to mathematical decision rules on the basis of information yielded as the survey progresses.

